History:

The oldest mention of Pandharpur is from 516 CE from Rashtrakuta era copper plate inscription. Yadava Kings in 11th and 12 the century gave numerous donations to the temple as evident from the inscriptions.

In the era of Adilshahi, most of the town was destroyed by Afzal Khan to hurt the religious sentiment of Shivaji. Saints from all across Maharashtra still gathered here for annual pilgrimage and thus Pandharpur became the heart of the devotional movement which laid to the social-religious reform. This resulted in new social synthesis which later paved the foundation of Maratha Empire.

In the second half of the 18th century under the Marathas the temple and town was rebuilt under the Peshwas of Pune, Scindia of Gwailor and Holkar of Indore.[3]

//......................

ABOUT:

Pandharpur  is a Popular pilgrimage town, on the banks of Chandrabhagā River, near Solapur city in Solapur District, Maharashtra, India. Its administrative area is one of eleven tehsils in the District,[1] and it is an electoral constituency of the state legislative assembly (vidhan sabha).[2] The Vithoba temple attracts about a million Hindu pilgrims during the major yātrā (pilgrimage) in Ashadha (June–July).

A small temple of Śri Vitthala-Rukmini is also located, which is as old as the main Vitthala-Rukmini Mandir, in Isbavi area of Pandharpur known as Wakhari Va Korti Devalayas and also known as Visava Mandir. The Bhakti Saint, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, is said to have spent a period of 7 days in city at the Vithobha Temple. It is said that the deity Vithoba has been worshipped by many saints of Maharashtra. Sant Dnyaneshwar, Sant Tukārām, Sant Nāmdev, Sant Eknāth, Sant Nivruttināth, Sant Muktābai, Sant Chokhāmel̥ā, Sant Savatā Māli, Sant Narhari Sonār, Sant Gorā Kumbhār, Sant Meerā Bai and Sant Gajānan Mahāraj are a few of those prominent saints.

//........................

Significance:
There are other many ancient scriptures which elaborate the importance of Vitthala.

Chandogya Upanishad : The fourth chapter of the Chandogya Upanishad, has one of the source of the ancient tradition of Shri Vitthala's worship. It contains the story of King Janśhruti who mentions about his visit to Pandharpur when he was on the way to search for Raikva.  He remarks that " He arrived at the location where the god "Vitthala," who is simply a reincarnation of Vishnu, was located on the bank of the river Bhimā. The name of this pilgrimage is Bindutirth, and the name of the local deity is Bindumādhav. There the God who gives the blessings of material and spiritual prosperity still lives."


Pandharpur Streets
Padma Purana : The meaning of Pānduranga or Viṭthala is explained in Varāha samhitā of Padma Purana. Devrishi Nārada narrates to Ādiśeṣa about arrival of Pānduranga in Pandharpur, It explains the background and significance of Vitthala's brick-standing at Pandharpur and origin of the Bhima River. Additionally, it provides information on Pandharpur's different gods and deities. Neera Narasinḥpur is as holy as Prayāga , Korti or Vishnupad is as holy as Gayā, and Pandharpur is as holy as Kāśī. Therefore, a trip to Pandharpur could result in the blessings of the pilgrimage to these three locations. This is where Gaya śhraddha and Kāshi yātra rituals can be carried out.


Pundalik
Skanda Purana : Shiva narrates to Pārvati, "This place is spiritually fruitful three times more than Puṣhkara , six times more than Kedārnāth, ten times more than Vārānasi and many more times than Śriśaila. Performing Yātra, Vāri, and Dān have great merit at this place.


Pilgrims bathing in the Chandrabhaga river at Pandharpur
There are four gates on the outside and inside of this building. Only via these gates may a person enter a city and they must bend their heads to the deity of these revered gates. Goddess Sarasvati is to the east, Siddheshvar of Machanoor is to the south, Bhuvaneshvar is to the west, and Mahiśhāsūrmardini is to the north at the internal gate. To the east of the exterior gates are Trivikarms of Ter, Koteshvar of Krishnatir Shorpalaya Kśhetra, Mahālakśhmī of Kolhāpur and Narsinḥa of Neera narasinhapur.

Vishnu is regarded to reside here with his nine celestial attributes. Vimalā, Uttkarshani, Dyan, Kriyā, Yoga, Pavi, Satyā, Eshana, and Anugraha are the names of those nine powers. Garuḍh (the eagle) stands in front of the Pānduranga statue, with Brahmā and Sanakadika to its right and the eleven Rudras and Shiva to its left. All of the gods, including Indra, are applauding Panduranga from behind the idol.

This ancient text goes into detail about the importance and advantages of various temple rituals, including taking refuge in the temple's shadow, performing Pānduranga darshan, praising Panduranga in front of him, dancing in the rangshala, visiting the temple for darshan during dhupārti, cleaning the temple grounds, etc.The text clarifies the significance of the Pandharpur shrines Kundal Tirtha and Padma Tirtha.

Balarāma also arrived and served the deity, along with Dhaumya Rishi and Yudhiṣhṭhira and all of his brothers. In Pandharpur, Rukmini served the deity and gave birth to Pradyumna. The effects of the river Bhima's entry into Pandhari, Pandhari's protector Shri Bhairava, the devotee Muktakeshi's meditation, and her acceptance by God are all detailed in this scripture.[4]
