History:


It was constructed on 19 November 1801. The original structure of the Siddhivinayak Temple was a small 3.6 meter x 3.6 meters square brick structure with a dome-shaped brick shikhara. The temple was built by the contractor Laxman Vithu Patil. The building was funded by a rich Agri woman named Deubai Patil. Childless due to infertility, Deaubai built the temple so that Ganesha should grant children to other infertile women. Ramakrishna Jambhekar Maharaj, a disciple of the Hindu saint Akkalkot Swami Samarth, buried two divine idols in the front of the presiding deity of the temple on the orders of his guru. It is claimed that after 21 years of the burial of the icons, a mandar tree grew at that spot with a svayambhu Ganesha in its branches – as prophesied by Swami Samartha.

The 2550 temple complex had two 3.6 meter Deepamalas, a rest house and living quarters for the caretaker. It had an adjoining lake, 30 x 40 square meters in size on the eastern and southern side of the temple. The lake, dug by Nardulla in the early 19th century to counter the scarcity of water, was filled up in the later years and the land is now not part of the temple complex. Around 1952, a small Hanuman shrine was built in the temple complex for the Hanuman icon that was found during the road extension project of Sayani Road near Elphinstone Road. In the 1950s and 60s, the fame of the temple spread and a significant number of devotees began visiting. However, in the same period, the owner of the plot sold some of the temple land, reducing the complex area. After 1975, the number of devotees increased dramatically.[3]

//..................................
ABOUT:


The Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir is a Hindu temple dedicated to Ganesha. It is located in Prabhadevi neighbourhood of Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.[1] It was originally built by Laxman Vithu and Deubai Patil on 19 November 1801. It is one of the most popular Hindu temples in Mumbai.[2]

The temple has a small mandap with the shrine for Siddhi Vinayak ("Ganesha who grants your wish"). The wooden doors to the sanctum are carved with images of the Ashtavinayak (the eight manifestations of Ganesha in Maharashtra). The inner roof of the sanctum is plated with gold, and the central statue is of Ganesha. In the periphery, there is a Hanuman temple as well. The exterior of the temple consists of a dome which is lit up with multiple colors in the evenings and they keep changing every few hours. The statue of Shri Ganesha is located exactly under the dome. The pillars are carved out with the images of ashtvinayak.

//.............................

Legend:

 Lord Vishnu was engaged in a 1000-year battle with the demons, Madhu and Kaitabha. Upon praying to Lord Ganesha, the sustainer of the universe – Lord Vishnu – received siddhis. And he vanquished the demons. Lord Vishnu created a four-door temple and put a statue of Lord Ganesha. Since Lord Vishnu achieved siddhi here, the elephant-headed God was called Siddhivinayak. Siddhtek or Siddhshetra became the name of the place. 

//.................................

The architecture of the temple:

The original Siddhivinayak temple had an ancient architectural style, having a hall, a sanctum sanctorum, with some free space and a water tank in the front. A complete architectural transformation was given by an architect named Sharad Athale in 1990. Temple has a small mandap with the idol of Siddhivinayak and a carved wooden door with an image of Ashtavinayak (eight avatars:  Vakratunda, Ekadant, Mahodara, Gajanana, Lambodara, Vikata, Vighnaraja, and Dumravarna).

The inner sanctum and the central statue of Ganesh are covered with gold. The exterior of the temple is six storeyed, multi-angular, and the main central dome is gold plated. There are three entrances to the temple. With the main dome, 37 other smaller gilded domes contribute to the temple structure. Special pink marble and granite are used to reconstruct the exterior of the temple.
