Background Information:HISTROY

According to legend the lingas were first placed at what became the temple site by a former atheist who had become a devotee of Shiva,[2] a story which was made into a hagiographical film, Sri Manjunatha, released in 2001.

The main attraction of the temple is a huge linga measuring 108 ft (33 m) tall and 35 ft (11 m) tall Nandi idol, surrounded by lakhs of small lingas spread over an area of 15 acres (61,000 m2). The Nandi idol is installed over a platform which is 60 feet (18 m) in length, 40 feet (12 m) in width and 4 feet (1.2 m) in height. There are eleven small temples constructed within the premises for various deities. A water tank is set up close to the Linga, used by the devotees to perform Abhisheka. The idols vary between 1 foot (0.30 m) and 3 feet (0.91 m) in height. There is a guest house, a marriage hall, a meditation hall and an exhibition center attached to the temple.[3] The temple has the largest and tallest linga in Asia. The number of lingas is ~6.5 lakhs (i.e. 10 lingas within 1 m² of land, implies 61,000 m² of land can accommodate approximately 6.1 lakhs of lingas) and not one crore (ten million).

//.................................

About Kotilingeshwara Temple:


‘Koti’ in Kannada means a crore and Kotilingeshwara is 1 crore Shivalingas. The temple with the tallest Shivalinga in the world is installed here along with 90+ lakhs of other Shivalingas of different sizes. The 33 mts high Shivalinga and 11 mts high Lord Nandi, the Bull are the main attractions of the temple. The temple is open for donations of Shivalingas of various sizes which can be installed with the name of the donor embedded on it. In 1980, the temple was initiated and constructed by Swami Sambha Shiva Murthy. The road to the temple is easily approachable and is located in Kammasanadra, a small village in Kolar District. Even though there are a lot of devotees who visit the temple every day, the temple attracts millions of tourists on Maha Shivaratri. Shivaratri is a festival dedicated to Lord Shiva and usually occurs in the month of February or March. There are 11 smaller temples dedicated to the other deities like Lord Vishnu, Brahma, Mahesh, Rama, Goddess Annapoorneshwari, Goddess Karumaari Amma, Lord Venkataramani Swamy, Lord Panduranga Swamy, Lord Rama, Sita and Lakshmana Temple, Lord Panchamukha Ganapathy, Lord Anjaneya, and the Goddess Kannika Parameshwari Temple in the same premises.


//...............................

Legend of Kotilingeshwara Temple:

Kotilingeshwara Temple
According to local legend, the King of Gods, Indra, once cursed Sage Gautama. The sage wanted to rid himself of the curse, and he installed a Shiva Lingam and prayed to God. He anointed the Shiva Lingam with the water of ten million rivers. The Shiva Lingam, even today, can be seen on the premises of the temple.

//....................

Architecture of Kotilingeshwara Temple:


The temple houses a Shiva Lingam measuring 108 feet high and the Nandi measuring 35 feet in height. The Nandi is installed on a platform and is surrounded by the small Shiva Lingams across fifteen acres of land. The premises have smaller temples for other deities, including Goddess Annapoorneshwari, Sri Panchaganapathy, Sri Rama, Sita Devi, and Sri Lakshmana, Sri Pandurangaswamy, Goddess Karumaari Amma, Sri Venkatramani Swamy, Sri Anjaneya, and Goddess Kannika Parameshwari among others. The temple currently has ninety lakh Lingams and has a project to install one crore Lingams.

There is a water tank built close to the Shiva Lingam. Devotees draw water from here to perform Abishekam to the Shiva Lingam.

The temple premises also have a marriage hall, a meditation hall, a rest house, and an exhibition center. There are two flowering trees in the temple where devotees pray for wishes to be fulfilled.
