Murudeshwar Temple:ABOUT

Murudeshwar temple is one of such temples which look quite contemporary though it belongs to the ancient era. The temple is dedicated to worshipping Lord Murudeshwara considered to be one of the forms of Lord Shiva. The temple is situated in India in the state of Karnataka. The temple has one gripping thing is that it is surrounded by Arabian Sea from three sides and the temple premises begins with a twenty storied Gopuram. Besides that the thing that makes it way more bewitching is the location of a huge statue of Lord Shiva which is the second largest statue of Lord Shiva in India.

//.......................................................


Murudeshwar Temple:Legend 


According to folklore, once Ravana, the mighty and mythical Demon King of Sri Lanka, 
prayed earnestly to Lord Shiva, pressuring him to hand him over his 'atma linga' (Soul of Shiva).
 Lord Shiva was so overwhelmed by his devotion that he granted him the linga under a condition that the linga must not touch the ground, 
till it reaches Lanka, which meant that Ravana cannot rest till he reaches Lanka.
 Ravana carried the atma linga from Mount Kailash all the way to his kingdom, Lanka. 
In the meanwhile, Lord Ganesha, who sensed the danger, came to Ravana and tricked him into keeping the Atma Linga on the shores of the sea at Gokarna. Enraged by this, Ravana tried to pick up the Linga, but he could not even shake it. Fuming in rage, Ravana used all his might to destroy the linga as a result of which a few broken pieces of linga were scattered all over the place. The cloth, that was used to cover the linga, flew towards Kanduka Giri and here is where Murudeshwar temple was built to celebrate the presence of Lord Shiva.

//...............................................

HISTROY:

The origin of the name "Murdeshwar" dates to the time of Ramayana. The Hindu gods attained immortality and invincibility by worshiping a divine Linga called the Atma-Linga. The Lanka King Ravana wanted to attain immortality by obtaining the Atma-Linga (Soul of Shiva). Since the Atma-Linga belonged to Shiva, Ravana worshipped Shiva with devotion. Pleased by his prayers, Shiva appeared before him and asked him what he wanted. Ravana asked for the Atma-Linga. Shiva agreed to give him the boon on the condition that it should never be placed on the ground before he reaches Lanka. If the Atma-Linga was ever placed on the ground, it would be impossible to move it. Having obtained his boon, Ravana started back on his journey to Lanka.

Lord Vishnu, who learned of this incident, realised that with the Atma-Linga, Ravana may obtain immortality and wreak havoc on Earth. He approached Ganesha and requested him to prevent the Atma-Linga from reaching Lanka. Ganesha knew that Ravana was a very devoted person who performed prayer rituals every evening without fail. He decided to make use of this fact and came up with a plan to confiscate the Atma-Linga from Ravana.

As Ravana was nearing Gokarna, Vishnu blotted out the sun to give the appearance of dusk. Ravana now had to perform his evening rituals but was worried because, with the Atma-Linga in his hands, he would not be able to do his rituals. At this time, Ganesha in the disguise of a Brahmin boy accosted him. Ravana requested him to hold the Atma-Linga until he performed his rituals, and asked him not to place it on the ground. Ganesha struck a deal with him saying that he would call Ravana thrice, and if Ravana did not return within that time, he would place the Atma-Linga on the ground.

Ravana returned to find that Ganesha had already placed the Atma-Linga on the ground. Vishnu then removed his illusion and it was daylight again. Ravana, realising that he had been tricked, tried to uproot and destroy the linga. Due to the force exerted by Ravana, some pieces were scattered. One such piece from the head of the linga is said to have fallen in present-day Surathkal. The famous Sadashiva temple is said to be built around that piece of linga. Then he decided to destroy the covering of the Atma-Linga, and threw the case covering it to a place called Sajjeshwar, 37 kilometers away. Then he threw the lid of the case to a place called Guneshwar (now Gunavanthe) and Dhareshwar, 16-19 kilometers away. Finally, he threw the cloth covering the Atma-Linga to a place called Mrideshwar in Kanduka-Giri (Kanduka Hill). Mrideshwar has been renamed to Murdeshwar.


//........................................

BEST MONTH TO VISIT
November to February

HOW TO REACH
Nearest Road - 165km from Mangalore and 455km from Bangalore

Nearest Railway Station – Murudeshwara station is only 2 km away from the temple.

By Air – the nearest airport from the temple is Mangalore International airport which is situated at a distance of about 165km from the temple.

TEMPLE TIMING
Day Timing – Opens at 6am and closes at 8:30pm.

Lunch Timing – 1 pm to 3 pm

Morning Puja – 6:30am to 7:30 am

Afternoon Mahapuja - 12:15 PM to 1 PM

Night Puja - 7:15 PM to 8:15 PM

FESTIVALS CELEBRATED AT THE TEMPLE
Maha Shivaratri (February or March) and Karthik (November to December) Purnima is celebrated in the temple with full fervour and enthusiasm.

NEARBY TEMPLES
Nearby temples to Murudeshwara temple includes Sri Mahabaleshwar Temple, Gokarna Idagunji Maha Ganapathi Temple and Kollur Mookambika Temple.

ADDRESS
Murudeshwar Temple, NH 7, Bhatkal Taluk, Murudeshwar, North Canara, Karnataka- 581350