Legend:

According to legend, there were three brothers who were mute, deaf and blind. They were digging a well to fetch water to their field. The device they were using fell into the well hitting hard object. When they dug further, blood started to gush out of the well and the three got rid of their disabilities. The villagers rushed to the spot and found deity of Ganesha. Villagers dug further, but they were not able to find the base of the deity. The deity sits in the well which is always full of water

//....................
ABOUT:

Vinayaka Temple or Sri Varasidhi Vinayaka Swamy Temple is a Hindu temple of Ganesha. It is located at Kanipakam in Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh, India.[1] The temple is about 11 km from Chittoor and 68 km from Tirupati.

//..........................
HISTROY:

kanipakam Vinayaka Temple is one of the most popular Ganesha temples in Andhra Pradesh. The history of the temple begins with three brothers discovering the murti of Vinayaka in a well used for agriculture and drinking purpose. As per the story of origin of Kanipakam Temple, three brothers who were dumb, deaf and blind used to draw water from a well to cultivate their land.

Once the well dried out and one of the brothers tried to dig the well. But soon the spade used to dig hit a stone and blood started oozing out from the stone.




The well was filled with blood and it started overflowing. The three brothers who got washed up by the blood had their deformities cured.

Soon people started pouring into the area, prayers were offered and the blood flow stopped.

Soon villagers entered the well and tried to unearth the murti. They discovered that it was a swayambhu murti of Ganesha – who later came to be known as Kanipakam Vinayaka.

Attempts to unearth it remained unsuccessful.

Even today the murti of Kanipakam Vinayaka is in the well.

The murti is also growing in size. The armor that was offered to the deity 50 years ago no longer fits.


During rainy season the well overflows and thousands arrive to witness this holy event. 

The holy water from the well is distributed as teertham.

The temple is located around 11 km from Chittoor town. 

