ABOUT:

Kanaka Durga Temple is a famous temple in Vijayawada dedicated to Goddess Durga. Kanaka Durga Temple is one of the many Shaktipeeths located in the country. This stunning architecture is built in the Dravidian style. This beautiful temple is situated on the banks of river Krishna and surrounded by the hills of Indrakeeladri. The mention of this ancient temple is also found in many sacred texts and Vedic literature. People visit this temple every year to show their respect and devotion to the goddess and seek her blessings.
There are timings and rules for darshan in the temple. That’s what we’re going to tell you today. The idol of the mother in the Kanaka Durga temple is self-styled. Thousands of pilgrims visit the temple every day. This temple has a special place among the seven Shivlila and Shakti glories. Kanaka Durga present here during Navratri is decorated as Balatripura Sundari, Gayatri, Annapurna, Mahalakshmi, Saraswati, Durga Devi, Mahisasurmardini and Rajarajeshwari Devi.

//.........................
Legend of Kanaka Durga Temple:

There are many legends about the origin of the temple of Goddess Kanaka Durga. According to a legend, this area was earlier covered with mighty rocks. He had stopped the flow of the Krishna river and the area became uninhabited. Lord Shiva was called to end the problem who instructed the hills to make way for the river to flow unhindered. The flow of the river got its strength from tunnels, and hence the name Bezwada was born. and later changed to Vijayawada.

A legend claims that Arjuna prayed to Lord Shiva on the top of Indrakila hill to win his blessings and he was successful in passing that test. Which Lord Shiva had presented to him. And had gifted the Pasupat weapon to the middle Pandava. And hence the name Vijayawada was coined. The goddess Durga is clearly at the center of the most famous. One is that the goddess visited the top of the mountain where the temple is worshipped.

The sage was pained by the increasing threat of demons led by Mahishasura and Durga answered his plea to have the demon king killed and made Indrakeeladri his permanent abode. Another thing is that a Yaksha named Keela had got a boon from Goddess Durga. that she will always be in his heart. Giving her a boon, he said that she would be a mountain and that she would sit in a temple situated within the mountain range when the time came.

//......................

Architecture of Kanaka Durga Temple:

The idol of Mother Durga in the Kanaka Durga temple is decorated with beautiful glittering ornaments and bright flowers. The main sanctum sanctorum of the temple is constructed in the form of a pyramid. It is embellished with delicate stone carvings. The most impressive aspect of the Kanaka Durga temple is its golden crown. Which can be seen from miles away. There is also a Lord Shiva temple near the ancient temple complex. Which is known as Malleswara Swamy Temple.

This temple is the only such temple in the world. Where the female deity is situated to the right of the male. As contrary to tradition the woman is the seat to the left of the wife. This is important because it really reflects. That the power or feminine power of the cosmic universe is predominant here. Both these temples are the center of attraction for anyone visiting the temple.

//......................
HISTROY:

If we tell about the history of Kanak Durga temple, then its mention is found in the scriptures and Puranas of our Hindu religion. That Kanaka is a self-manifested or self-manifested goddess to Mother Durga in the Durga temple. Because of that Mata Durga is considered very powerful. The present form of the temple was built by Pushapati Mahadev Varma in the twelfth century. He built the modern Vijayawada city.

//.....................

Kanaka Durga Temple Timings And Entry Fee:

Sri Durga Malleswara Swamy Varla Devasthanam opens at 4 am. and closes at 9 pm. The temple opens at 4 am on Friday and Saturday and closes at 10 pm. Private vehicles are not allowed here from 10.00 am to 2.00 pm. Let us tell you that there are three different darshans in the temple. Which are Dharma Darshanam, Mukha Mandapam and Antrayam Darshanam.

He is from 4.00 am to 5.45 pm and from 6.15 pm to 9 pm. Swarnapushparchana Puja is performed on Thursdays from 5.00 pm to 6.00 pm at Antaryalam. 20 will have to be paid for Mukha Mandapam Darshan. 100 per person will have to be paid for Antrayam Darshanam. And admission to Dharma Darshanam is free.
