ABOUT:

Sri Bhramaramba Mallikarjuna Temple (IAST: Mallikārjuna) or Srisailam Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to the deities Shiva and Parvati, located at Srisailam in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh.

It is significant to the Hindu sects of both Shaivism and Shaktism as this temple is referred to as one of the twelve Jyotirlingas of Shiva and as one of the eighteen Shakti Pithas, centres of the Hindu Goddess.[1] Shiva is worshiped as Mallikarjuna, and is represented by the lingam. His consort Parvati is depicted as Bhramaramba.

//.........................

Legend:

When Shiva and Parvati decided to find suitable brides for their sons. Shiva got Buddhi (intellect), Siddhi (spiritual power), and Riddhi (prosperity) married to Ganesha. Kartikeya on his return was enraged and went away to stay alone on Mount Krauncha in Palani in the name of Kumara brahmachari. On seeing his father coming over to pacify him, he tried to move to another place, but on the request of the Devas, stayed close by. The place where Shiva and Parvati stayed came to be known as Srisailam.[2]

As per Hindu legend, the presiding deity in the form of Linga (an iconic form of Shiva) was worshipped with jasmine (locally called in Telugu as Mallika), leading to the name of presiding deity as Mallikarjuna.[3]

Mahashivaratri is the main festival celebrated at Srisailam Mallikarjuna Swamy temple.

//.......................

Architecture:

The temple complex covers 2 hectares and houses four gateway towers known as gopurams. The temple has numerous shrines, with those of Mallikarjuna and Bhramaramba being the most prominent. The temple complex houses many halls; the most notable is the Mukha Mandapa built during the Vijayanagar period. The temple is situated facing East. The center mandapam has several pillars, with a huge idol of Nadikeshwara. The temple is enclosed by tall walls measuring 183 m (600 ft) by 152 m (499 ft) and 8.5 m (28 ft) tall. There are a number of sculptures in the precinct each rising above another. The Mukamandapa, the hall leading to the sanctum, has intricately sculpted pillars. The shrine where Mallikarjuna is housed is considered the oldest in the temple, dating back to the 7th century. There is a Sahasra linga (1000 linga), believed to have been commissioned by Rama and five other lingams believed to have been commissioned by Pandavas. A mirror hall in the first precinct has images of Nataraja.

//.......................
History Behind the Srisailam Temple:

Perched atop the pious peaks of the Shri Shaila Mountain, a magnificent abode of two supreme deities reigns over an adoring local populace. The Mallikarjuna Temple based in Srisailam is a grand celebration of the Shaivism and Shaktism worship in India.

When Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvati decided to marry their two adoring sons, Lord Ganesha and Kartikeya, they were in a dilemma who should be married first. Lord Shiva and Parvati then devised a competition for their sons. Shiva decided that whoever circumambulates the earth first wins and will be married first.

Kartikeya set out on his flying peacock mount, thinking there was no chance that his brother could win on his mount which was Mouse Mushaka. But Ganesha was clever and devised a strategy that would ensure his success.

srisailam mallikarjuna temple
He went around Shiva and Parvati seven times, arguing that parents were equivalent to the world according to the Shashtra scriptures. The Shastras are a set of rules that have been a part of Hinduism since the conception of the religion. This feat much impressed Shiva and Parvati, and they married Lord Ganesha to the embodiment of intellect (Goddess Buddhi), prosperity (Goddess Riddhi) and spiritual dexterity (Goddess Siddhi).

However, the celebration was short-lived because when Kartikeya returned, he was furious that he lost. Feeling dejected, he flew away to Mount Krauncha to spend his days as Kumar Brahmachari. Shiva and Parvati then followed after their son to appease him and presided on the Mountain as Mallika and Arjuna. They became patrons of the mountain and lived there with Kartikeya. The site was then called Mallikarjuna and became a holy place of worship for both Shiva and Parvati disciples.
