History:

This temple was constructed by King Harihara Bukka Raya of the Sangama Dynasty of the Vijayanagara Empire in the 15th century.[citation needed] It was built according to Vaishnavaite traditions.

One story of the site's origin is as follows: The sage Agastya wanted to build a temple for Lord Venkateswara on this site. However, the statue that was made could not be installed as the toe nail of the idol got broken. The sage was upset over this and performed a penance for Shiva. When Shiva appeared, he said the place suits Shiva better as it resembles Kailash. Agastya then requested Shiva to give the devotees a Parvathi Goddess as Lord Uma Maheswara in a single stone, which Shiva obliged.

A second story is as follows: Chitteppa, a devotee of Shiva, was worshiping Shiva and Shiva appeared to him as a tiger. Chitteppa understood that it was Lord Shiva in tiger form, and shouted Neganti Shivanu ne kanti (meaning: I saw Shiva I saw), and danced with joy. There is a cave called Chitteppa nearby. Sri Yaganti Uma Maheswara Temple is one of the few temples patronized by one of the great dynasties of India. Every year Maha Shivaratri is celebrated and a large number of devotees from all over Andhra Pradesh visit. Shiva, Parvati and Nandi are the main deities in this temple. This temple is 14 km away from Banaganipalli in kurnool dt. The saint lord Veerabrahmendra swami stayed here for some time and wrote Kalagnanam.[1][2]

//..........................

Architecture:

Pushkarini-

A feature of this temple is its Pushkarini, a small pond of water on the temple premises. Water flows into this Pushkarini from the bottom of hill through the mouth of a Nandi (bull). The water is fresh and sweet, as it comes from the hills. No one knows how the water reaches the pond all year round and this temple architecture in terms of its sculpture shows the skills of ancient Viswakarma Sthapathis. Devotees find that a holy bath in Pushkarini is highly beneficial. After taking a bath in Pushkarini, they pay tributes to Lord Shiva.[3][4]

he sage Agasthya bathed in Pushkarini and worshipped Shiva.

Caves present in and around yaganti temple are:
Agastya Cave
This is the cave where Agastya performed his penance for Shiva. One can enter the cave by climbing 120 steep steps. A murti to Devi is installed and may be worshipped here.[5]

Venkateswara Cave
The damaged murti of Lord Venkateswara is present in this cave. Compared to Agastya cave it is easy to climb though the steps are steep. According to the story this murti was present in this cave before the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple was constructed. But as the murti is damaged near the foot, it could not be worshipped. Sri Sri Potuluri Veera Brahmendra Swami tells us in his Kala Gynanam that this place can stand as an alternative to Tirupati.

Veera Brahmam Cave
This is the cave where saint Sri Madvirat Potuluri Veera Brahmendra swamy wrote some of his Kala Gnaanam (prophecy). The height of the cave is less and one needs to bend half over to enter it.

//...................
ABOUT:

Dedicated to Shiva, the Yaganti Temple, also known as Sri Yaganti Uma Maheswara Temple, is situated in the Nandyal district of Andhra Pradesh, India. Delving into its history and narrative, the temple was erected by King Harihara Bukka Raya of the Sangama Dynasty during the 15th century, adhering to Vaishnavite traditions.

//....................

Legend of Yaganti Temple:
Yaganti Temple
Legend has it that Sage Agastya wanted to build a temple for Venkateshwara here. The idol, however, could not be installed as the toenail of the idol was broken. This greatly upset Sage Agastya who performed penance. Shiva appeared and told the sage that the site was better suited for a Shaivite temple as the region resembled Kailasa. Sage Agastya then requested Shiva to grant an idol of Goddess Parvati as Sri Uma Maheshwara in a single piece of stone. Shiva agreed and gifted him the idol accordingly.

According to another legend, a devotee of Shiva called Chitteppa was offering worship to the God when he appeared as a tiger before him. The devotee was quick to realize that the tiger was none other than Shiva himself and shouted that he had seen Shiva and danced with great joy. There is a cave called Chitteppa near the temple.
