The Chottanikkara (correction of Jyotiannakkara) Devi Temple is a temple dedicated to the Hindu mother goddess Bhagavati Lakshmi.[1] She is believed to be residing in Chottanikkara (Mahalakshmi) along with her Husband Maha Vishnu. The main deity is also considered as Lakshmi Narayana according to the temple legend.[2] The temple is Classified one among the 108 Abhimana Kshethram of Vaishnavate tradition. The temple is located at Chottanikkara, a southern suburb of the city of Kochi in Ernakulam district, in the state of Kerala, India and is one of the most popular temples in the state. The temple is also known for conducting exorcism.[3]

In terms of temple architecture, the Chottanikkara temple stands out to be an ultimate testimonial to the ancient transl. hi – transl. vishwakarma sthapathis (wooden sculpture) along with Sabarimala temple. Sree Mahamaya Bhagavati is one of the most popular deities in Kerala and the supreme mother goddess in Hinduism. Chottanikkara Devi (Melekavu Bhagavathi) is worshipped at the temple, in three different forms: as Mahasaraswati in the morning, draped in white; Mahalakshmi in noon, draped in crimson; and as Mahakali in the evening, decked in blue. Devotees used to chant "Amme Narayana, Devi Narayana, Lakshmi Narayana, Bhadre Narayana" in this temple. Goddess 'Keezhkkaavu bhagavathi' is believed to be Bhadrakali, in her fierce form or Ugra form. People suffering from mental illnesses and commonly visit the temple, as Chottanikkara Devi is said to cure her devotees. Guruthi pooja is a ritual done in the late evening to invoke the goddess Mahakali. Earlier 'Guruthi Pooja' was done only on Fridays. But nowadays, it is performed every day.

//................


Legend:


This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The area in which the temple is situated was once a dense jungle. A tribesman named Kannappan used to live in this forest. He was a devout worshipper of the goddess Mahakali, and would ritually sacrifice a buffalo to her every Friday (the day of the Goddess). One day, he found a calf near the forest. He kidnapped the calf and took her to his stone altar. Just before he is about to sacrifice the calf, his daughter Pavizham stepped in and pleaded to him to stop the sacrifice. The man loved his daughter and thus let her keep the calf as a pet. Unfortunately, Pavizham died some days later, possibly due to a snake bite. Kannappan broke into tears and decided to cremate her body. To his surprise, his daughter's corpse disappeared. A nearby priest told him the reason for such an occurrence; Kannappan used to forcibly take young calves from their mothers and sacrificed them. As punishment, he met the same fate when his daughter died. When the tribesman looked for the calf, he found the sacrifice alter shining in its place. The priest explained that the calf represented the divine couple, Lord Vishnu and Lakshmi. He asked Kannapan to pray before the alter everyday to undo his sins.[4]

Since Kannappan's death, the stones were forgotten. The stone was rediscovered accidentally by a low caste grass cutter, who found that blood was oozing out of a stone which she had accidentally cut. Horrified at what she saw, she brought the matter to the public's attention. A nearby priest was called to solve the problem. After devaprasnam, it was concluded that the stone was divine. That day, the elder Brahmin of the Yedattu house came along with some puffed rice in a coconut shell and this was offered to the Goddess for the first time. Even today this system of offering puffed rice in a coconut shell continues. The Brahmins of Yedattu house became the hereditary priests at this temple since those days.

Another legend associated to the temple is that of the spiritual leader Shankaracharya. During the time where he lived, Adi Shankara realised that there wasn't a single temple in Kerala that signified the worship of goddess Mahasaraswati. As a result, he himself went to the kashmir and meditated for many days for the goddess to appear before him. His meditation bore fruit and before him stood the stunningly beautiful goddess, clad in white. On enquiry, he said that he would like to bring the goddess to Kerala and establish a temple dedicated to her worship. This way the people from Kerala would not have to go such far off distances to worship her, as in the case for those who were old and aged. After a lot of persuasion, the goddess agreed; she would follow him by foot wherever he went, but only on one condition. If he trusts her, then he was not allowed to look back to see if she followed him or not. If he did, then wouldn't go any further. He agrees and they proceed walking. They were walking down the Kodachadri hills, with Shankara leading the way and goddess' anklets tinkling and letting him know that she was with him. After walking some distance, the tinkling stopped all of a sudden. Shankara waited a few moments and stole a quick look backwards to find the goddess still with him, watching him with reproach. In keeping with the condition, the goddess stopped right there. This is the spot which would turn out to be the Mookambika temple. Shankara, however, was not one to give up. He apologized profusely for breaking the condition and repeatedly begged and pleaded with the goddess to go with him to Kerala. After many pleas, the goddess agrees to a compromise and came to Chottanikara in Kerala, where the Chottanikara temple stood.

From early hours of morning, goddess would come and appear before the devotees at the Chottanikkara temple in the form of Goddess Mahasaraswati. Then in the afternoon, she would return to the Mookambika temple (spot where she stopped). Since then, the sanctum doors of the Chottanikkara temple were opened during early morning hours in honour of worshipping goddess Mahasaraswati before the doors of the main sanctum in Mookambika temple were opened.

//..............................
About Chottanikkara Temple:

Kerala’s Chottanikkara Temple is close to Kochi. Here, the Goddess Lakshmi is revered. Bhagavathy is another name for the Goddess. The idol stands 4 to 5 feet tall. She possesses four arms and cradles the disc in the upper right arm. The upper left arm carries the conch. The lower left arm is in an Abhaya stance, which indicates courage, while the lower right hand is in a blessing position.
