Thyagaraja Temple (also called as Vadivudai Amman Temple) is a Hindu temple dedicated to Hindu god Shiva. It is located in Tiruvottiyur in the northern part of Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. The temple is revered by the Tevaram hymns of Saiva nayanars, the 7th century Tamil saint poets and classified as Paadal Petra Sthalam. All the Three of Thevaram Moovar (Appar, Samandar and Sundarar) has rendered Thevaram songs in this temple. The temple is closely associated with the saint poet Sundarar and Pattinathar. The temple has been in vogue from the Pallava times of the 7th century and widely expanded by Chola kings during the 11th century. The temple has a seven tiered gateway tower, a tank, with the overall temple area covering 1 acre. The temple is administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu. The temple draws parallel with the Thygaraja temple in Tiruvarur as both the temples were expanded by Rajendra Chola I and both have the same dance poses of Shiva. The temple is one of the 51 Sakthi Peetams in the country.

The temple is also one of the Sakthi triad in the region of Tondaimandalam, the other two being the Kodiyidai Amman Temple or Masilamaniswara Temple at Thirumullaivoyal and the Thiruvudai Amman Temple or Thirumanangeeswarar Temple at Minjur.

Legend

Shrine of Vadivudai Amman
Brahma is the Hindu god of creation and one of the three primary gods of Hinduism, the other two being Vishnu ,god of preservation and Shiva ,god of destruction . He created the Devas(Gods) and Asuras (Demons) and Daityas - both these groups fight against each other. While the antigods , called asuras use muscle power, the Gods called devas use the power of Veda, the sacred texts.Once, two asuras, Madhu and Kaithaba tricked the gods to steal the Veda, chopped it to pieces and hid it in the bottom of the sea. Vishnu fought the demons, but could not defeat them. He prayed to Shiva and Parvati and with the accomplishment, he was able to defeat the demons.He took the form of Matsya, a fish to search the Veda.The recovered Veda from the bottom of the sea was brought to the deity at this temple, who reunited and purified it.The wishing tree of gods, makizha tree, became the sacred tree of the temple.

History

Shrine of Tiruvoteeswarar located behind the main shrine in the second prcinct
The temple was the centre of learning, with the halls inside the temple acting as venue for religious discourses in subjects like vyakarna (translation), Somasiddantha (philosophy) and Panini's grammar. There was a hermitage attached to the temple during the 9th century, presided over by Caturananas Pandithar. The temple also had philosophical discourses and expositions on grammar.There are references to recital of Prabhakara, Rudra, Yamala, Purana, Sivadharma, Panchanga and Bharata.Lands were granted to learned scholars and their generation like Vedavritti, Bhattavriti, Vaidyavritti and Archanavritti.

There are a number of inscriptions inside the temple dating back to Pallava period.Sankaracharya, the 8th century scholar in the advaita school of Hinduism is believed to have visited the temple to put down the power of evil. The temple was originally built by Pallavas and later rebuilt by Rajendra Chola I.The inscription dating 954 CE, the fifth year of the Chola king Gandaraditya indicates 90 sheep for burning lamps and ilavilaku, a lamp made in Sri Lanka).The inscriptions dating from 1046 CE reveal that 64 bronze nayanmar statues were installed in the temple.There were equal number of dancing girls called Devadasi in the temple, who were divided into two groups - the valankai dasis danced for Thyagaraja, while the idangai dasis danced for Vadivudaiamman. During the reign of the Malik Kafur, much of the temple was destroyed and the bronze idols present now in the temple were installed during the Vijayanagara period of the 15th century. A 13th-century inscription indicates the practise of animal sacrifice to the goddess, which continued along with offering intoxicating drink till the early 2000s. Famous saints like Pattinathar, Topeswamigal and Ramalinga Swamigal lived in this town and prayed Thyagaraja in this temple. This place is also home to Thiruvottiyur Thyagayyar who is a carnatic composer and poet. The temple had been a centre of learning as seen from the inscriptions in the temple. The inscriptions indicate specific subjects like Purvamimansa styled as Pravahakarma. There were also provisions made for feeding and maintaining for teachers and students.